In this video, we'll talk a
bit about what object-oriented
programming is all about.
But before we do that, let's
review procedural programming
and its limitations.
Procedural programming is pretty
much what we've been doing up
to this point in the course.
The focus of procedural
programming is the function.
We modularize our programs by creating
many functions that each specify a
process or action in the program.
So procedural programs are
basically a collection of functions.
In procedural programming, we declare
our data separate from the functions.
And then wherever we need to function
to process or use our data, we
pass in the data to the function.
If you recall our challenge
from section 11, that's
exactly what we did.
There's absolutely nothing wrong
with procedural programming.
And in many cases, you have to
use it since not all languages
support object-oriented features.
Procedural programming is also
fairly easy to learn since we're
pretty good at breaking up a task
into subtasks, which is exactly what
procedural programming is all about.
However, procedural programming
has some limitations.
One of the limitations with
procedural programming is that
the functions need to know
about the structure of the data.
This may not sound like a big deal.
But suppose we have a program with
hundreds of functions and many of
those functions expect a specific
data structure as an argument.
If the structure or format for
that data structure being passed
around changes, then this would
affect many many functions.
These functions might even
have to be modified to handle
the new format of the data.
This could have a ripple effect
in the program and the amount
of effort needed to change and
then test all of the updated
functions could be substantial.
I've worked on very, very large
projects where the decision was
made not to upgrade a data structure
because the changes needed in the rest
of the program would be too expensive
in programmer and testing time.
The real limitations to
procedural programming really
begin to show as programs
become larger and more complex.
As procedural programs get larger
and larger, they become more
difficult to understand since the
number of connections in the program
becomes very hard to trace by hand.
This leads to problem maintaining
the software, extending the program
and finding and fixing bugs.
Also, reusing functions and data
structures that we wrote for one
program in another program becomes
much more difficult since after time
we end up with code whose behavior
isn't that easy to visualize.
Finally, the code becomes more
fragile and easier to break.
That means that when we
add new functionality or
fix a bug, the chances of
introducing another bug is high.
This happens more often
than you would think.
And it happens more in large
procedural programs than it happens
in large object-oriented programs.
Okay, so now let's talk about
some of the principal features
of object-oriented programming.
So what is object-oriented
programming all about?
In this video, I'm
focusing on object-oriented
programming and its benefits.
We can also have object-oriented
analysis, object-oriented design,
object-oriented testing and so forth.
Object-oriented is all about
modeling your software in
terms of classes and objects.
There's some new jargon to learn
along the way, but it's not so bad.
Don't worry if it all
doesn't click right away.
We'll be using this new terminology
a lot in the rest of the course.
These classes and objects
model real-world entities
in your problem domain.
So if you're writing an application
that allows users to store, edit
and manipulate images, like iphoto
on a mac or photos on a PC, then
your classes might be album, photo,
slideshow, location and so forth.
If you're modeling a student
enrollment system, your classes
might be student, course, professor.
You get the idea.
Why is this such a big deal,
and how is it different
from procedural programming?
Well, first, let's talk about
why it's such a big deal.
It's all about abstraction.
As our programs grow more and
more complex, we need ways
to deal with the complexity.
Classes and objects are
one way to do just that.
Now rather than thinking in terms
of first name, last name, student
ID, credit hours and so forth, we
can think in terms of student,
and all that detail comes along with it.
Not only that, but operations like
register, drop course, add course and
so forth, also come along with it.
So if Frank is an object and it was
created from the student class, I
can send a message to Frank and ask
Frank if he's registered this term.
This is very different from
procedural programming where
I would have a function that
would tell me if the student is
registered and then I would have
to pass a student to that function.
You might ask so what it
still works in procedural
programming, and you'd be correct.
But now the function needs to
know how to determine if the
student is currently registered.
If this business logic changes,
then we need to figure out
everywhere in the program that knows
this so we can update the code.
In the object-oriented solution,
only the student class knows
this, so a precise change
is all that's necessary.
The fact that objects contain
data and operations that work on
that data is called encapsulation.
And it's an extension of the abstract
data type in computer science.
Now the data and the operations
are together in the class where
they belong and not spread
across many functions each
passing and receiving data.
Encapsulation is another mechanism
used by object-oriented programming
to help us deal with complexity.
We can take the idea of encapsulation
even further with information hiding.
Object-oriented programming allows
us to hide implementation-specific
logic in a class so that it's
available only within the class.
This is a super powerful concept
since it allows us to provide
a public interface to the
class and hide everything else.
Now we know that the user of
the class can't mess with the
implementation-specific code since
they never knew about it in the
first place, that's pretty cool.
This makes the code easier to
maintain, debug and extend.
Object-oriented programming
is also all about reusability.
Reusability is defined in terms
of using something from this
program in another program.
Since classes are pretty much
encapsulated units of data and
operations reusing them in other
applications is much easier.
And since the class has already been
tested, we get that benefit as well.
This leads to faster development
and better quality software.
Finally, you've probably
heard about inheritance.
Inheritance allows us to create
a new class based on an existing
class by only adding or modifying
the elements that we need to be
able to create our new class.
For example, suppose we
have an account class that
models a basic bank account.
So it has a balance and the regular
withdraw and deposit methods.
Now suppose we have the need for
a special trust account class.
And our business logic says that
this type of account is limited
to three withdrawals per year and
each withdrawal can't exceed 10%
of the current account balance.
We could add this logic to the account
class that we already have and have
an enumeration or some other kind
of discriminant that determines what
type of account we have and then
execute the appropriate if else logic.
Sure, that works.
But what if we expect lots of
variations to that account class,
like a money market account,
a CD account and so forth.
And each one of them has its
own business logic, not only for
withdrawal, but also for deposit.
And some accounts change fees and
others produced interest income.
You get the idea.
This could quickly make that
simple account class that we
started out with, a beast that
no programmer wants to deal with.
In this case, we can derive our
new class from the existing account
class and add the appropriate
behavior in the new class without
modifying the original class at all.
This leads to reusability as well
as polymorphic classes, since all
the derived classes we created
are in fact still accounts.
We'll learn more about the power of
polymorphism later in this section.
So oo sounds pretty amazing, right.
Well while oo can certainly help us
develop large programs that are easier
to maintain, test, debug and reuse
components from, it's not a panacea.
Oo won't make bad code better,
it will likely make it worse.
Also, oo is not suitable for
every application, and not
everything decomposes into a class.
There are sometimes non-functional
requirements that horizontally
cross-cut a system, and these
tend to add tangled code
within existing classes.
Remember, if you have a small
program that won't be around for
any significant amount of time,
maybe it's an internal program
that you're using to automate
something, then object-oriented
programming might be overkill.
A simple procedural or scripting
program may be perfectly appropriate.
Generally, object-oriented
programming has a steeper learning
curve than procedural programming.
C++, in particular, is considered
one of the most difficult
programming languages to learn.
Also, there are many
object-oriented languages out there.
And while they all support
classes and objects and so forth,
the way that they support them
can be quite different not only
syntactically but also in behavior.
As mentioned in the beginning of
this video, it usually takes more
upfront design time in order to
write an object-oriented program.
In fact, large object-oriented
programs sometimes go through
significant upfront design.
Finally, object-oriented programs
tend to be larger in size than
non-object-oriented programs and
can sometimes be slower and more
complex since there's so much
more going on behind the scenes.
This can be especially true
with object-oriented languages
that use a virtual machine.
However, the great news is that
among object-oriented languages,
c++ is probably the most
efficient language out there.